so i started using my anxiety as a clue
and as a friend and every time i had
anxiety i was willing to say it's
because i was engaging in a thought that
wasn't authentic with my real nature
anxiety is our body's way of trying to
communicate with us what you just ate
what you just thought what you just did
who you just talked to whatever it is
doesn't agree with you
[Music]
everybody welcome to impact theory
today's guest is jewell a four-time
grammy-nominated singer-songwriter who
has sold more than 30 million albums and
had one of the best-selling debut
records of all time in addition to that
she's also a multiple time new york
times best-selling author actor and
philanthropist who's been on the cover
of time magazine had a cirque du soleil
show made about her life and written one
of the best-selling poetry books of all
time she's now also officially added
being at the forefront of the
mindfulness movement to her resume by
working with large companies to help
their employees find harmony in their
lives as well as producing a new
documentary with deepak chopra on the
subject called mindfulness movement
jewel welcome to the show
thanks the intro i wrote was perfect you
did it great
i wish that would be amazing that would
save me a lot of time but yours was very
easy to write your life story is
insane reading your book was
was actually a lot of fun the the prose
of the book is extraordinary as well as
the content and the life you've lived is
is pretty amazing um
and i have to assume and you've talked
about it that that's really informed a
lot of what you're doing now
and i'd love to go into that i want to
talk about this concept that you have of
the observer
talk to me about that what is the
observer when did it first start
appearing in your life and has it been
useful
uh i was homeless for a year in san
diego i was propositioned by a boss and
wouldn't wouldn't have sex with him he
wouldn't give me my paycheck could make
my rent so i started living in my car i
didn't think it would last that long i
thought it would be a couple months
until i got a new job and saved up a
deposit for a new place
but my car got stolen i was having panic
attacks i was agoraphobic um
and when you don't have an address it's
hard to get a job it's hard to have a
resume it's uh you start looking
homeless and so i couldn't even get a
job at 7 11 you know ultimately
and just the amount of time it takes to
survive and find shelter and safety in
food and water is exhausting
um
i was starting to have panic attacks and
agoraphobia and
i realized i would end up in jail or
dead if i didn't do something about it
and i remember this quote by buddha that
said happiness doesn't depend on who you
are or what you have it depends on what
you think
and i was stripped of everything else
except my thoughts and it was the only
thing left and so
i decided to see if i could change my
life one thought at a time and i took it
really seriously
but i had so much anxiety that i
couldn't figure out what i was thinking
in real time if anybody suffered from
that type of anxiety you're pretty much
out of your body
you can't even track your thoughts
um
and so i started watching my hands
because i thought your hands are the
servants of your thought it's your
thoughts slowed down into action do you
remember
that i've heard you talk about that
before and that that is very powerful
it's super insightful um is that
something you read is that just
something that you literally noticed
it's just something i noticed um as i
was sitting there in a complete panic
all right my job is to figure
turn my life around with my thoughts
holy f i can't figure out what my
thoughts are you know it was just
desperation i think
um and really having the time and
deciding to sit down and think about how
does this work and what's another way
and i think part of being a creative
person is you start to get really
comfortable with problem solving
um and you have to i moved out when i
was 15 so my whole life was problem
solving having no option how am i going
to figure it out
um and so watching my hands just seemed
like the
it sounds so silly now like that was my
huge plan i was going to watch my hands
like it's a ridiculous plan
but it ended up working not the way i
thought
i i mean there was a takeaway after two
weeks of watching my hands i literally
just had a notebook and watched and
wrote down i washed my hands
i didn't want to shake hands i opened a
door you know i had no idea what i was
doing
at the end of two weeks i realized i
quit believing in myself that was you
know interesting that my thoughts were
all geared toward i can't i can't i
can't so that was interesting
but there was a completely unexpected
side effect that my anxiety disappeared
when i was doing it when i was
journaling it disappeared in other words
mindfulness weren't around at that time
there were no books about this
but it was such a huge discovery for me
that i realized
so much that year i realized fear is the
thief
it takes the past and it projects it
onto the future and robs you of the only
opportunity you have to change and i
wanted to change you know i knew moving
out at 15 i should be a statistic
i knew that i should end up in jail or
dead if i didn't figure this out
and so if i really wanted to change i
actually had to show up in the current
moment
and that's what mindfulness does again
that word wasn't around and so i just
started to make all these discoveries
that year and the biggest one i started
to realize was that when i was observing
myself
my anxiety disappeared and i realized
this trippy thing i had read you know
descartes i think therefore i am and
read a lot of his works that doubt
somehow validates our existence which is
a sucky way to go but what it is true i
guess
i
realize it's not i think therefore i am
if it if i could change that a little
bit i'd say i observe what i think
therefore i am i'm not my thoughts
i'm the observer of them
which gave me some room because it
created this magical gap between my
thoughts and who i was um if i was
sad i wasn't sad i was the observer of
sad
and at that little bit of distance that
gap the way i would describe mindfulness
is
you know if you have a thought creating
a gap before you act on that thought and
in this gap is like this magical chamber
where you can change that's where you
can step in and form new neurology
neural networks
rewire new patterns and starve old
neural patterns
yeah that's really interesting to me how
much you can go from the poetic to the
neuroscience behind the stuff and i find
that really intriguing i know you've um
i don't know if you've worked closely
with him or if you just know him or know
his work but judson dr judson brewer has
actually been a guest on the show
amazing guy really interesting when you
start looking at the neuroscience of
this stuff when did you begin to
discover that so that for me so one i
want to talk about the gap that you're
talking about so i read a book called
man search for meaning by viktor frankl
concentration camp survivor he talked
about that gap that between stimulus and
response is exactly what you're
describing and that your life is
essentially that choice
and then going back to what you opened
with talking about anxiety and
you so i i suffered profoundly from
anxiety for years i would still say it's
it's a close to daily part of my life
i've certainly learned how to manage it
a lot more
and to me it didn't feel so much like i
was out of my body it felt like i was
trapped or a slave to my body because i
i couldn't get out of the neurology of
what was happening
and so when did you begin to discover
that the the neuroscience of it all
allowed me to visualize it which allowed
me to begin unwinding some of the
processes to become more present
was that something that helped you or
did you discover that sort of after you
had fought your way through it
you know it's really fascinating to me
that if we do sit
and contemplate a problem
we will come to some truth
that many other people come to in
similar situations whether they're in a
concentration camp or
in a lab it fascinates me i call it
going into the river of yourself to find
the ocean of everything else um
i realized about the habit loops i
didn't have that word for it uh again
when i was homeless
i was addicted to stealing
and i was addicted to negativity and i
was addicted to anxiety i could tell
that
and
i just stopped suddenly one day and i
was struck by the thought that
if our brains are addictive if we are
capable of being addicted if it's such a
natural thing to us
there must be a biological evolutionary
reason i mean it can't be that this was
all a mistake and oops sorry about that
addictive part of your brain you know
it just didn't make sense and so i
wondered if i could get addicted to
negative things could i get addicted to
anything to positive things
and so i noticed this i called it a
triad i noticed i had a problem and it
was triggering me i knew that word and i
didn't know that word then
a stimulus i knew being homeless was
really bad for me my my anxiety and
my panic attacks and i had a response
and it was stealing and then i had a
reward and so i realized i couldn't
change this first one but i could change
my reaction to it and so i decided to
insert
writing and so every time i wanted to
steal i forced myself to write
and i did it enough and it was hard it
wasn't fun it didn't feel good i'm
stealing would have felt way better
but i stuck with it enough um
to where i started to get a reward
um
and then i realized once i could do that
i could start to tackle really specific
problems and get highly specific
um
i look at
i look at meditation i was taught to
meditate by an aunt when i was about 12
maybe
it was transcendental meditation i
didn't really stick with it but i knew
of the concept um
and then i think also writing being
creative i sang my whole life and i
wrote my whole life forces you to be
present so it turns out if you're being
observant or curious you're in a mindful
state that easy
so if you're anxious all you have to do
is get really observant and really
curious it can be about the light in the
room it could be the smell of something
but you're forced instantly into a
mindful state you don't even actually
have to meditate to do that per se
and then i realized i have to start
taking the skill of meditation
out how do i describe it it's like going
to the gym and building up a muscle
and if you build up that muscle in the
gym it's important and it's great and it
changes you but unless you can put that
muscle to work in your day your life may
not be fully changed
meditation is like doing a bicep curl
but i needed to find a way how to take
that bicep curl and that muscle i was
building and change habits and that's
where i started developing very specific
exercises to
attack or change very specific problems
i was struggling with and i continued to
do that my whole life my whole career
and then i met dr brewer
maybe two years ago
and when he saw the exercises i
developed he was like those actually
work those actually rewire your brain
and so on my website he he goes on and
actually explains why they work which
was a total trip and really amazing
so i'd love to hear what some of those
exercises are what are some of the
specific things that that you did then
they morphed and changed what are you
doing now
when i was homeless i realized
i had two basic states i felt like this
or i felt like this it was open and
dilated or it was tight and contracted
and i realized every thought feeling and
action led to one of those two states
and so a really simple hack was when i
noticed a panic attack coming on or a
huge anxiety attack
i would
just force myself to have a thought
feeling or action that dilated me it
sounds really simple but i just used
gratitude so i remember my first time i
tried it i was on the street corner i
liked to live near this little flowering
bush it was like my home
and
i was miserable and anxious and heading
into a panic attack and i forced myself
to notice the light coming through this
palm tree
and the way it filtered down and it
looked like a lace dress on me and
i just forced myself to feel the sun to
smell the air
to be profoundly grateful that i was
feeling the sun on me i had a lot of
memories of alaska sitting in the sun
and it forced my entire system to dilate
and i didn't know at the time what i
know now you know now there's a lot of
science your vascular system does dilate
your blood pressure does you know drop
your blood flow patterns change in your
brain
um and you get a different biochemical
release which is amazing i felt it at
that time i didn't know the the science
but i knew that it worked so that was a
that's one that i teach on the website
and they're all just three-minute
exercises that are very specifically
designed to attack very specific and
certain things as we try to change
that whole notion of um being able to
change is is literally the core of my
being it it's certainly the journey that
i've been on it's been the thing with
having as many employees as i've had and
that have grown up hard that have not
been nurtured well when i was reading
your book that whole notion really
resonated with me of okay um nature
versus nurture if you weren't nurtured
well can you find your true nature
walk walk people through that and i
think a little bit uh you know some of
the touch points of how you grew up hard
why you moved out at 15 would be useful
but really what i want to know is
what's the punch line like how much have
you been able to re-nurture yourself
yeah
so i grew up in an abusive household um
moved out at 15 to get out of that
situation
knew i should end up becoming a
statistic was hell-bent as a 15-year-old
to not do that
and i looked at this concept of nature
versus nurture i had read a lot of greek
philosophy up to that point and so i
think i felt i could think my way out of
this problem possibly
and i'd heard the concept of nature
versus nurture um
we had a bunny that
that thought it was a chicken when i was
being raised it was
raised since a tiny baby with the
chickens and it actually grew up to sit
on nests and hatch eggs and it walked it
hopped kind of funny like a chicken and
it pecked at its food and it scared the
crap out of me when i moved out because
i thought what if i'm a bunny that
thinks it's a chicken how will i ever
know my real bunny nature
what if my nurture was so bad i don't
ever get to know my actual real nature
and that thought and concept has been a
real constant
motivation i guess in my life
um
i did you know well i got myself through
school i
made it through this period of being
homeless i ended up getting discovered
my goal when i was discovered was to be
a whole happy person first and to be a
musician second and that was my deal
with myself
and why i signed the contract and i've
stayed true to that i've
continued my education and developing
these skills so that i could change
because if you take somebody with my
background and you add fame on it you
talk about a whole nother round of
statistics you know it doesn't end well
you've seen this movie over and over
i didn't want it to be that way so i
took years between records i
did all kinds of things that are bad for
your career but i felt were the only way
to invest in my humanity and keeping
good on my progress my promise to myself
but i kept finding myself
in similar situations again and again
and again
so in my book never broken i i talk
about the amount of change i was able to
facilitate which extraordinary really if
i think about it i went from an outhouse
and no running water in alaska to being
on the cover of time magazine that's a
lot of change
but at the same time nothing changed and
i'm writing a book right now it's
actually all about change
what don't we understand about that word
because we grow we get different
but we don't actually change like on a
deep chemical level it's like water
turning into ice or fog
and rain it's still water and that was
me i was having the same emotional
spirit experience over and over in very
different settings
so it was like being on the same road
and i got the scenery to change from icy
you know views out my window to green
and pastoral to gilded and gold
but my experience was the same i was on
the same road so how do we get on an
entirely new road how do you actually
change your entire paradigm
so the way that i used mindfulness it
did change me it helped me a ton
but i realized it kept me
in the same paradigm
it's like the hammer and nail right if
you're a hammer everything looks like a
nail
i learned you to use mindfulness in my
hammer and nail paradigm to help me have
a better experience of getting hit over
the head by a hammer
but i never got out of that paradigm and
so with this book now that it isn't out
yet but it should be soon hopefully is
about how do you build an entirely new
paradigm how do we build our reality
through and our personality through a
form of emotional connections and
misunderstandings that form our entire
paradigm
and then how can you find that top
domino and actually unplug it
and plug it into something else to get
yourself on an entirely new trajectory
it is a fascinating topic and obviously
to the point where i wanted to write a
book about it and so what does some of
that look like so you you have i would
say a pretty extraordinary
level of self-awareness being able to
turn inward you've talked about the
ability to look inward as a superpower
if you were to
turn that into a formula for somebody to
follow like what does that look like as
an adult you're looking back your life
is not going where you want you maybe
you are the statistic you
you know you should be avoiding you're
not able to do it you're out of your
body you're not you know you're you're
riding the waves of your emotions
instead of taking advantage of that gap
how do you begin walking people through
a process of change
the new book it's funny i haven't talked
about the new book at all yet you're the
first person i've talked to about it it
seems to be coming up the book really
starts to lay out an outline you watch
me discover the process
and it lays out something that you can
actually practice to me the big part is
practice you can have intellectual
awakenings you can have therapeutic
realizations
but until you find skills that you can
practice every day you're not going to
build a new neural network and you're
not going to actually create a new
thought paradigm for yourself to operate
within
so it really is about practice i'm very
into skills i'm very into giving people
things that you can do every day because
unless you do that it's not really going
to change
the thing i can't do for people
is the willingness to do it
the willingness to change
it's for warriors like change isn't easy
you don't just get to turn on the tv and
wake up changed sadly
um i always say being dysfunctional is a
lot of work and it's exhausting and
there's no light at the end of the
tunnel
so learning a new way is hard and it can
be exhausting but there's a light at the
end of that tunnel so to me that's the
bet i'd rather take
but you have to be willing to a lot of
people say they want to change but they
don't at the end of the day and that's
really the truth of it
if you are willing to do that it really
helps to have
a series of questions get asked you know
this took me so long to discover i
studied
ancient wisdoms of indigenous cultures i
got a billion books on neuroscience
to kind of amalgam if that's a word
everything together in a way that's a
system that really caused a fundamental
level of change
and so going a little bit deeper on that
system um when you
so i think you and i are pretty aligned
on you
i mean it's the adult age old adage you
are what you do every day right so
excellence is is a habit it's the things
that you do and i always tell people
what you're trying to do like when you
think about making a dramatic change in
your life what you're trying to do is
change your behavior so thinking about
values which i know you think about a
lot beliefs rules in your life things
like that using my own vernacular but
the whole punchline of all of that for
me is are you doing different things are
you changing the things you do because
once the external manifestation changes
then your life changes then the neuro
chemistry changes so it's like you're
doing this work inward for sure but if
it doesn't manifest outwardly then you
really have a problem so i talk a lot
about routines so for me working out
eating right those are huge because they
cultivate
and if nothing else and there is a lot
more but they cultivate the the
physical chemistry that you need to make
sure that the new neurons that you're
making actually can thrive right so just
being in a place where at a
physiological level you're creating the
optimal environment for your brain to be
healthy so that you're optimizing
cognition you're at a point where your
emotions are like anxiety i am convinced
is largely a function of diet so it's
the microbiome communicating to the
brain
so getting people to eat right getting
people to exercise
are part of the the system of change as
i think about it i've been very curious
to know like what are like the
prescriptive behaviors that either you
do or that you tell people to do
absolutely diet's a huge one
i've spent i always had kidney problems
and health problems and so i had to seek
out a lot of alternative
care and practically gain a doctorate
and everything from herbology to western
medicine just to try and figure out how
to advocate for myself
diet
understanding our own body's personal
chemistry i do my blood work every three
months because i have the money to do
that now
um because i like to see how everything
i'm doing is affecting me i just find it
fascinating
um
everybody's different the things that
work for me are going to be different
than what works for you and so you do
have to find practitioners that are
willing to help work with you to see how
you're wired how you metabolize and
those types of things i think that's a
huge part of it
for me it was always finding tools and
resources i could somehow implement
myself because i didn't have access to
help or therapy or these types of things
and that's what i'm really passionate
about helping give people as well
if you're
do you do have the money for a therapist
but your life isn't changing you need to
re-look at it
you need to have goals you know with
change i actually had to develop a
metric for the book of how do you
describe change how do you quantify it
how do you create a metric around it so
that you can look back and go i have
changed i just didn't get different or
kind of grow or put on a different
outfit emotionally if you will but
you're the same person
um i've got to know what what is the
metric for change that is amazing
well there's three pillars to change
it's transformation transmutation and
then transcendence can you find those
i can i would love to get my book
because i really worked hard on the
definitions
and see if i could even find it it'd be
funny to see if i could
it might be helpful to define the
metrics and mechanics of what
constitutes change to say something has
really changed it has to go through
three processes
if only the first or second steps have
taken place you may have become
different or grown but you cannot really
say you've achieved change
there are three pillars to change one
transformation
we must look at what gives form to what
we are looking at we must understand its
nature we must feel motivated to
transform it into something else this is
where we identify where you are and
where you want to go two transmutation
this is the initiation of energy it
requires sacrificing the energy of what
you want to change so you can get to the
next step
sacrifice is an essential part we must
sacrifice an old belief an old concept
break down an old paradigm
let go of the illusions
we have to break it down or digest what
we are changing so it can become
something else
this is where we put new concepts into
action if we have a new understanding
and don't act on it if we don't use it
it creates inner conflict
we must act on knowledge to transform it
into wisdom
what you don't give birth to will
destroy you so this isn't just physical
but an idea if we don't give birth to a
new concept if we don't take action on
it it'll destroy us
keep us in a lot of conflict
we can't sit on a new understanding and
not act on it
if we don't take the energy in absorb it
and break it down it will create a
conflict and make you unhappy
once we break down old beliefs we can
become pregnant with different ideas
if we don't take time to give them space
in our lives to have a good birth and
transmute that energy it will create a
deep conflict that we don't if we don't
and we won't change
the less judgment we hold the more we
can transmute try to see through clear
eyes letting go of dogma and paradigms
and experiences
as energy for what they are
the more we can perceive and sacrifice
programmed attachments to the ideas we
are examining or letting go of the more
we can transmute them to be open to a
new way of seeing or thinking
when we don't get rid of our perceptions
and old ideas it creates a blind spot
and keeps us from changing three
transcending
viewing a situation with new eyes
becoming open to new paths when we alter
our perceptions free of old dogma and
paradigm it opens new pathways before us
we can take new pathways that changes
our trajectory this is where we use
intention to set a new path that allows
us to transcend our past experience it
is entirely possible to change so
foundational that our old stories and
traumas no longer trigger us it becomes
part of a story of your life that no
longer influences where you go next when
we transcend something we are no longer
in relation to it we are no longer it no
longer has power over us we're at
liberty to choose where we want to go
man that that is amazing um there's a
few things in there that you've talked
really powerfully about and i'm super
excited to read the new book again i
cannot tell you how sincerely i mean
that you're
never broken the the beautiful
prose the incredible concepts the way
that you're able to
help people have their own inward
look as they live through your life
really really extraordinary
that snippet is phenomenal i think those
three things are really interesting the
notion of death and rebirth is something
that i've heard you talk about before
um that to me is really interesting and
i cannot help but notice behind you
um you have these skulls with antlers i
don't know if they're deer or elk or
whatever yeah
is that is it just that they're
beautiful or is there some of this death
and rebirth notion and making room for
the new energy which i find really
intriguing
um
i'd love to hear more about that and
this whole notion of of death and
rebirth and how it manifests in real
life because it's not necessarily um
literal death but there is still a
letting go and making that new space
yeah i was adopted by american natives
when i was 15.
and they brought me into a lot of their
traditions and it got me fascinated with
studying indigenous knowledge from all
over the world
one of the things i share in the book is
this what i'm what i call a wheel of
development um
spot to go into but on the
from
nine o'clock to midnight
uh are
some stones on the wheel of
introspection death rebirth and wisdom
is at 12 o'clock and
this wheel of development is something
each of us travel you know once in a
lifetime as well as with any business
startup with any new relationship
you can look at this wheel as sort of a
map or a blueprint
and right now if i was to say where we
are as a country we're in death and
rebirth so there's introspection and
when we
introspect we now have to let go of
things which is a death
and then we get to be reborn into a new
thought process or way of being a way of
relating to the world
and then when we act on that we have
wisdom
but you can travel the wheel in an
encumbered state
um so there's an unencumbered state
where if you travel the wheel and
everything's kind of perfect you
experience it at its highest you know
that it can be
it's rarely true for any of us and so
there's an encumbered pattern of each
thing so the encumbered pattern of
introspection is repression if we refuse
to introspect we suppress or we rep
repress and so instead of letting go of
something and letting thoughts or ideas
have a death
we have fear
so we repress the result of that as fear
instead of being reborn into a new
outlook or a new way of seeing the world
we become disempowered
and then instead of moving into wisdom
we start suffering from doubt
so the encumbered pattern is really not
comfortable it's repression fear
disempowerment and doubt
so right now what's fascinating to me is
we look at where we are as a world as a
culture for the first time every world
power
is afraid of the same thing and it's
invisible that's never happened that i'm
aware of in the history
um and so we're either going to
introspect let go of old ways and
systems be reborn into new way and act
in wisdom
or we're gonna repress suppress
act in fear become disempowered and
doubt every action and step we make
and to me that's where i hope i can step
in i hope many many people can step in
and start helping us move in an
unencumbered pattern around that section
of the wheel
man we got to talk about identity then
because that that's an amazing breakdown
and i think the the reality is and my
gut instinct is everyone will resonate
with the sort of apparent truth of this
some people will take the um the
expansive path and many people are going
to take the contracting path literally
the words you were using as you were
describing i was like you're back to
those two central things you were saying
things either make you expand or they
make you contract
i think identity is a big part of why
people will end up really going in
either direction so my identity is that
of the learner so i'm you know i'm
seeking things that make me feel
expansive i want to learn i assume i'm
doing things wrong my identity is not
tied up in being right or worthy or any
of that my identity is like yo there's
got to be a way for me to get better to
improve i want to get rid of old ideas
because i'm like i've already arrived at
where my old ideas have taken me and i
don't want to be here in five years
right i want to be somewhere better more
productive more joyful more whatever
and i think though a lot of people going
back to
the the flip side of that point of
identity is you've got people who even
if it's trauma even if it's something
bad that happened that is their identity
and you um riff on this in never broken
which is as long as the words of your
abuser are ringing in your head like
you're never going to be free of that
abuse and that was an interesting
example and i think you do refer to it
as a death where
i don't think most people would think
like you actively have to let that go
you actively have to break your own
identity as somehow being tied to that
like the things that you've had to
overcome our
immense
and the fact that you
have had and i'm i'm so curious to know
if this is part of that true north um
that you alluded to a minute ago that
you've known who you were trying to
become
and have have let the things die away
that were we're holding on walk people
through exciting a lot of people are
going to be stuck in a negative mindset
in a trauma they don't believe in
themselves they uh have some sort of
trauma from the past that defines who
they are in the present but they don't
realize it like how do they begin to
make that space
in my book never broken i talk about
this experience with my mom
and i realized i was broke and i was
three million in debt nothing i'd ever
been told about my life was true and
this is all after selling the albums and
this is like the height of the height
yeah
um
and it was devastating i mean it was
just and it was a
total brain
mess for me it felt like just having my
brain shattered and it was in a million
pieces i didn't know reality from
fiction
um
having to go back through your life and
figure out what was true what was false
it was a hard thing to get through
and
i didn't press therapists i didn't trust
anybody to mess with my mind i was just
in a really bad state and i wouldn't
have even honestly known who to turn to
at that point because what i was dealing
with was so strange and unusual
i
quit a tour
because i thought like i was gonna have
a nervous breakdown if i went and uh i
was at my house and i walked out and
looked at myself in the mirror and i
don't know what these epiphanies always
happened in the mirror
and i remember this joseph campbell
allegory the allegory of the golden
statue
it's a story about a small village that
had a prized golden statue they heard a
neighboring village was going to come
and attack them
so they covered the statue in mud and
then
the war came and went the statue stayed
covered in mud the entire village forgot
its value generations passed
one day a child was sitting at the feet
of the statue it was raining saw a
glinter of gold and they realized the
statue had inherent value
for some reason that story came back to
me
and i thought what if i'm not broken
what if i'm attacking this entire
problem of trying to fix myself
from the entirely wrong perspective
when something's broken when you feel
broken inside you feel like something
outside of you has to fix you
very daunting
to be fundamentally so flawed that
something outside of you outside of your
own nature has to help fix you
i thought what if i haven't realized
like i can't be broken a soul is not a
teacup it's not a chair
it exists
permanently for all time whatever the
nature of that energy is it is forever
and so what if i'm not broken
what if i'm just covered in layers of
mud and silt and abuse and hurt and
neural programming
that isn't me it's like a hard casing
that i've become entombed in within my
own life but it isn't who i am
authentically
and so i started using my anxiety as a
clue and as a friend
i started
realizing that i didn't have to fix
myself as much as i had to do a very
loving archaeological dig back to who i
really was
get rid of the programming and every
time i had anxiety i was willing to say
it's because i was engaging in a thought
that wasn't authentic with my real
nature it was a clue my anxiety became
my best friend because it started being
a neon sign that said you're engaging in
a behavior a thought or an action that
does not agree with you
our anxiety is our body's way of trying
to communicate with us what you just ate
what you just thought what you just did
who you just talked to whatever it is
doesn't agree with you
and so i became very diligent i started
taking a notebook around every time i'd
have anxiety go what was i just thinking
what was i just doing and i'd start to
write it down and i started playing a
game it's up on my website jewel never
broken
as one of the mindfulness games which
helps rewire you
but it was called self another every
time i had one of these thoughts i would
write it down and i'd ask myself what's
the truth and this is different than you
know doing affirmations in the mirror
i'm not a huge fan of affirmations
um hope and fear travel the same neural
network in your body if you say i hope i
do good on my test you might as well be
saying i'm afraid i won't so we don't
hope we do we take action um and so
telling yourself the truth isn't
affirmative thinking it's finding
the truth that makes your whole body
relax it unlocks you
and it starts to really unwind your
anxiety it's fascinating
one thing i've heard you talk about that
i thought was really powerful is this
notion of okay when i first started
doing this i would get anxious because i
didn't know what i was doing and i
identified
basically a flip side of that and the
antithesis statement was no i know what
i'm doing but that you knew wasn't true
um what was the statement that you ended
up coming up with i feel like if people
really let this one sink in it's the
kind of thing that could unlock
something for them
yeah this is how we take affirmative
thought and tweak it so it isn't a hope
but it's the truth so i think an example
i gave in my book was
my best friend was dying i was under a
lot of stress i was doing a movie i'd
never done a movie before and i was
starting to go back into panic attacks i
hadn't had those in a long time
and so i tried everything i would record
myself saying the truth to myself at
night and fall asleep to it i was just
i'd try anything that would work
um
so the fear was i don't know what i'm
doing that came to me over and over and
over that was the lie
so i went to the antithesis of it i know
what i'm doing
it wasn't the truth i had no idea what i
was doing
okay but it gave me a starting place to
refine from
and i would just start playing around
with different phrases until i felt my
whole system relax and the truth was i
will figure it out and i will i've never
quit i know that about myself i have
never once quit until i figured
something out
and that made my whole system relax
and it let me trust my nature and i let
me trust my process i'll figure it out
and so every time i have this paralyzing
fear i don't know what i'm doing i would
say to myself the truth with a breath
and i will figure it out and i knew that
was true my bones knew it and it calmed
me down enough and again i didn't know
this at the time but that re-welts
reroutes the blood in your brain it
allows you to access a different part of
your brain so you can start to problem
solve
how did you go through
losing someone that close to you like
that that's something i've seen people
really really
have a hard time with
in my new book
i describe god as five primal powers
life death birth decay and creation
and those five primal powers are at work
at all times in the world
we're not supposed to practice our
spirituality or our self-betterment
whether you're an atheist or not
we're not supposed to practice and learn
to try and control our environments and
a lot of times we
we do it because we kind of have that
secret hope
that we can never hurt again and we may
never get blindsided again that was a
big one for me i was always getting
blindsided
what i realized is that these powers are
working at all the time right we're
always interfacing with life death birth
creation and decay something's always
being born and breaking down and it's
just life and so if you look at those
colors because i'm very visual
these colors are coming at us all the
time
we don't get to control what life throws
our way we do get to control how it
changes us
and so that's really the most productive
way to focus your time and your energy
and to sort of look at it like being an
artist i'm gonna take these experiences
these dark and wild energies and colors
i'm to weave them into something that
makes me a more resilient person
a more giving person a more wise person
and so it gives you comfort when you
deal with loss when you deal with grief
something else i talk about in the new
book is
all feelings come from seven core
emotions and i talk about them like the
seven primary colors all emotions stem
off of these seven
and grief does something interesting you
wouldn't expect it it dilates you
if you watch a system if you will let
yourself grieve and you won't resist it
your whole system will dilate so hard
it is asking you to connect to life
in a transformative way you do need to
go through your own death you're going
to be altered forever
you're going to change your perceptions
and how you relate to life and how you
connect to life and how you value life
forever it is asking you to do that when
we resist it and we tighten up we're
going to drag that experience out we're
going to repress it
we're going to experience the encumbered
patterns of the wheel that i mentioned
before
versus allowing it to make you dilate
and connect it isn't comfortable but you
do get through it
that's really interesting i never like
if somebody had just caught me off guard
and said is grief contracting or
expanding i for sure would have said
contract but you're absolutely right in
terms of when you try to resist it like
even
i'm not a big crier in fairness but in
in the moments where i have cried it is
a sense of letting go it is a sense of
unclenching right and to try to stop
that is this like really sort of hard
intense gripping that's interesting i
had never taken the time to think about
that
yeah i spent so much time studying
emotions
for myself and for this this book
because
we've inherited you know our genetics
but we've inherited a lot of beliefs and
a lot of
misunderstandings and so the way we
perceive something is honestly a
misunderstanding of grief i inherited
the same one
whether from my family of origin or from
me just interacting with life
you can't cry without dilating you can't
get mad without dilating if you stay mad
that's a grudge and that's something
entirely different you've tightened down
around two emotions that bonded and
turned into a grudge this is fascinating
topic
that's really interesting um
how have you
not like you have this really
interesting
thought around forgiveness and what it
is and um
specifically i will i will plant the
answer i've heard you give before which
is around it being like scissors um i'd
love you to explain forgiveness as you
see it
um and what you mean by it working as
scissors
i do like shortcuts
the only genuine shortcut life offers
is facing the obstacle
um
i realized a grudge carries everything
out and drags it out forever
to me winning is i want to like i want
to completely get past it
so for things like my dad who was
abusive when i was young or my mom that
ended up being incredibly deeply
betraying
forgiveness was the best way to win
as odd as that sounds um people confuse
forgiveness and condoning those are two
different things you can forgive without
condoning a behavior
i call forgiveness the needle that knows
how to mend if you want to heal
forgive them because it is like cutting
that last thread that connects you to
them which is sometimes why we don't
want to forgive it's
what connects us to our pain and our
pain connects us to
that wish that we still had them
um maybe hating a person that hurt your
child connects you to your child the
last way that you have
i mean it almost can make me cry it's so
tender i understand why we don't want to
forgive
but if you really want to be free if you
really want to have liberty you have to
cut that thread and the only way to do
it is is by forgiving and moving on you
never have to see the person again
um
again when i forgave my dad when i moved
out i never thought i'd see him again i
didn't forgive him so i could get back a
relationship i forgave him so i could
figure out how to heal and move on with
my life
now is it still true so you forgave your
dad and and because he has changed so
much
he's apologized and actually changed
behaviors you guys have reconnected is
it still true that you have not
reconnected with your mom
true
yeah my dad's incredible he's like i
mean you've heard of personality
settling and all these different
theories about how old you can be when
you change and
my dad is living proof that you can
profoundly change and he was in his 60s
when he got sober and he's in the 70s
now
happier today than he was yesterday and
he'll be happier tomorrow than he was
today it's incredible um
with my mom we don't have a relationship
i haven't seen her as i described in the
book since 2003 i think and i don't know
that we ever will i want to talk about
so the where you grew up
outside of homer alaska homer alaska
itself is not exactly a bustling
metropolis so to be growing up outside
that what you call a homestead
i'd love to hear a little bit about that
and i'm asking specifically because i
think your work ethic is insane
i find that as inspiring as i find your
your singing ability which is
unimaginable i've seen you perform live
it is breathtaking to say the least um
but your work ethic to me is is
awe-inspiring
thank you
um yeah i grew up on a homestead my
family were pioneers born in switzerland
but living dur in germany just at the
beginning of the second world war
they were able to escape and make it to
alaska that was giving away free land to
anybody that would go up there and
promise not to die for a whole winter
my grandmother was an aspiring poetist
and opera singer my grandfather was a
linguist
studied languages and etymology and
they raised these children you know
before it was a state
my grandfather actually ended up helping
draft the constitution for alaska which
is amazing only in america story
um
my grandmother taught them all to sing
and to write to paint you know sort of
very idyllic uh creative
upbringing in the woods there's a show
about my dad's uh and my family called
alaska the last frontier um most people
don't realize it's my family but that's
my dad and my brother my uncle and my
cousin
it's a beautiful way to be raised
while there certainly were a lot of
difficult things as i mentioned my dad
had to live through the creativity he
calls it the cure was in the disease
nature and creativity were this cure
which ended up helping heal him and i
feel the same way my family are hard
workers
they're going to be a pioneer and
literally forge
something out of nothing that's the
original entrepreneur like that's the
original
gangster of
of finding a new way forward um
and so being raised in the mentality was
you had to rely on yourself there was
nobody else to kind of come fix it you
had to figure out how to fix it
there were six ants
that i was raised with so my dad has
there's eight of them total six were
girls and so the girls are highly
capable in pioneer states women are not
treated differently and the roles are
interchangeable so i wasn't raised with
a gender
biased
system in alaska there there's no like
the women cook and the men do this like
i was not raised with that concept
i knew i wasn't as strong as a man but i
knew i was as capable and that if you
put your mind to it you could figure it
out and i think when i left alaska i
didn't realize that one single thing was
an absolute game changer for me going
forward i never thought i was a weaker
sex i thought i could think as hard as
somebody else and figure it out and find
my own solution i was taught that i had
to find my own solution that's how i was
raised and that was a tremendous
advantage um
when i got discovered you know i was on
a record label with probably 600 artists
there's no competitive advantage we're
all artists you know there's not like a
finish line and there's one winner
it's art you can't say red's better than
blue it's just the preference and a lot
of systems to help you get your your art
forward to see if people like it
so for me the only competitive advantage
i could find was my work ethic
i looked at these other musicians and i
believed i could outwork them
and that's what i said about doing and
about killed me
i don't know how wise it was but it did
work out
one of the one of my favorite stories um
in that is so your debut album ends up
going on to smash it 12 million records
sold one of the highest selling debut
records of all time
but it took you over a year to break it
if i'm not mistaken like you were
touring you said you were doing two and
three shows a day i think you said you
did 600 shows in a single year which is
it
literally just thinking about how many
shows that really is even if you didn't
waste more than that yeah that's insane
and i did it for multiple years
how did you do a voice
luckily i've always had a strong voice i
grew up bar singing and i think i just
built up this muscle and endurance
um
and i was just very tenacious uh i was a
folk singer at the height of grunge so
the odds against me were so high i was
singing songs called i'm sensitive
while you know nirvana was
out the odds of me making it were not
were not huge and i
i made a folk record in intentionally
because it's who i was i wanted to be
honest
what i just learned while i was homeless
was just my authenticity was my only
currency and i clung to it it was my
happiness
i didn't want to let go of it just to be
famous um
and then i had a hard road to hoe
and i had to be willing to pay for that
basically i had to buy that authenticity
with work ethic
because i didn't get to take the other
shortcut
so i did shows in the morning for high
schools
and then i would go do
one record in store you know go to a
record com store and play in the parking
lot
then maybe two or three radio shows um
this would be a multiple using two
cities a day
i would open for bauhaus at night which
is a goth band which was really
difficult
and then i did a midnight show in a
coffee shop and i did all this in a
rental car it was
grueling um
but every time i played i figure out the
puzzle how can i make this audience pay
attention to me how can i make them
listen to me i could see that i
converted people
and it just was a grass movement you
know just was a slow
a slow thing but it worked
one thing that i i'm curious to know if
you think this is a strength of yours
given my the way that i think i think
it's amazing is you have uh
i'm gonna prove people wrong
uh streak in your personality
from yodeling at the age of five because
your dad said or your grandfather said
somebody told you you were too young for
it and then learning to move every
muscle on your face because you didn't
want to have involuntary muscles
tell me about that
that sounds really funny hearing some
people say that it's ridiculous
um
yeah i think
you know there's something in each of us
some little voice in us that knows i can
do that i don't know how to do it yet
but i can figure it out
and i definitely had that when you have
that inclination you have to follow it
you can't let that die that's some truth
in you speaking
and it built up a grit i think you know
a tenacity that type of thing and again
with the way i was raised
yeah the involuntary muscle things
bizarre but i did it
is that something that you value in
yourself
it is
we have different phases in life you
know when we're young
we're looking for fuel right all of us
we're looking for something combustible
that can get us to the next level um
perfection we have we have healthy ones
and unhealthy ones
perfectionism is an unhealthy one you
know if you have any talent
and you become perfectionist
that perfectionism will be like a rocket
booster
but it
how i describe it it uh it limits your
ability to be genius it limits your
ability to be great
because perfectionism is careful it's
calculated it doesn't want to look
foolish
and so it's this deceiving rocket fuel
that gets you this far but that last
inch that's so hard to be great at
something
you have to be willing to take huge
risks you have to be willing to fail
terrifically on grand scales
perfectionism won't let you do that
and so a very difficult transition i
think a lot of people that are
successful don't often talk about
is how did they dismantle that
perfectionism and did they because if
they haven't yet and they've done these
amazing things i want to see what they
can do without it because if they can
let go of that and take that risk
it's stratospheric what you're capable
of accomplishing
the same thing's true about having a
point to prove you know i had a point to
prove um for sure
it was a rocket fuel it was a it was a
combustible energy that i knew how to
tap into it was visceral and i could
channel it and i could just make people
listen to me you know i was intense
and now that i'm older i don't feel that
way and it scared me once i started
learning to let go of having a point to
prove because it was like having a
knockout punch in your back pocket
and when you start letting go of that
because it it all it limits you it
limits your ability to go that extra
inch
what do you use to connect with people
if you're not going to wow them
with these other skill sets what's so
authentic and undeniable about you that
you're going to connect in such a deep
way that you'll get the same result but
in a much healthier and much more
sustainable way um
so i think i've really worked on letting
go of having a point to prove it's
definitely made me go
it made me search really hard for what's
interesting and what's visceral and how
do i connect i had to really redefine it
and search for a new and much more
sustainable way
man that's super interesting the the
people that you have um interacted with
from just ideologically somebody like
descartes which i'm still shocked by
because this is all happening
uh you know pre-internet uh either in
alaska or you know sort of at the edge
of living on our own and homeless um to
bob dylan taking you out with him on
tour um
the the wisdom that you've been able to
to coalesce runs is really fascinating
and like i'm saying the way that you've
coalesced all of it into shareable
wisdom i think is really extraordinary
and i think
using your own clock definition i mean
it with the full weight of that that
that midnight straight up is wisdom and
i certainly got that from your first
book i'm super curious to read your
upcoming book you have a new single
grateful out now album forthcoming uh
and
if you would tell people where they can
connect with you where they can find the
song uh be amazing and the mindfulness
movement where can they get that
yeah
um
the song is called grateful it's up on
any streaming platform
for any mindfulness tools i call it
making a habit out of happiness that's
it jewel neverbroken.com jewel
neverbroken.com
um
i don't know i guess you can find me
from those those two places
the mindfulness movement film you can
find it on instagram i'm on instagram
and it's just cool
amazing
last question what's the impact that you
want to have on the world
hmm
i think
it's it's a small
goal i want my life to be my best work
of art
i don't want my music to be my best work
of art or my poetry i want to be my best
work of art and
if that affects other people that's
gravy
but it's really just starting in here
it's amazing thank you so much for being
on the show everybody i'm telling you
right now if you only know her from her
music you have a treat coming your way
it's extraordinary the poetry is amazing
all of the mindfulness tools the book
the
just what she talked about her life how
she's lived it how she's gone
introspective what she's made of that
how she's made change it is really
extraordinary there's so much to learn
um i think you will love everything
about what she's doing so seek her out
find the stuff it will change you if you
let it um if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
what was that like
um being an immigrant and then trying to
make a name for yourself well i mean i
was born in haiti in a small
village
um
and they imagine a place so no
electricity
no running water